java c
GEOSCIENCE   001 SPRING   2022
LAB   5:    GEOLOGIC   TIME
This   lab   is   modified   from   “Geology   from   Experience” byE. kirsten   peters   and   Larry   E. Davis,from   “Investigating   Earth” by   C.   Gil          Wiswall   and   Charles   H. Fletcher, and   by   the   geologic   history   lab   developed   by   Michael   Harris   of   the   Department   of   Geology   at   James Madison   University.
Introduction
Large sequences of   layered sedimentary rocks can represent millions of   years   of   elapsed time.      Each distinct layer or bedin a sequence is called   STRATUM,   and   multiple layers   are   collectively   called   STRATA.    The study of   sequences of   strata is called   STRATIGRAPHY. A   sequence   of   strata may   also   be referred to as a   STRATIGRAPHIC   SECTION.
Extrusive igneous rocks such as lava flows   and   ash   falls may   also   form   as   beds   and   can   occur   as   discrete   layers in a sequence of   sedimentary rocks or they may   cut   across pre-existing   layers   of   rock.   All   sequences of   rock world-wide are sometimes collectively referred to as   the ROCK   RECORD.   Each rock   type and geologic structure in a sequence represents   a   different   geologic   event.   As   geologists   we want   to   understand   the   history   of   the   Earth   and   the   rate   of   geologic   processes. To   do   this,   we   must   be   able   to   date stratigraphic sections and the rock record. This lab provides   exercises   to   investigate the   two   types   of   dating that geologists use, RELATIVE and NUMERICAL or ABSOLUTE DATING.
Relative   Dating
RELATIVE DATING refers to the placing of   events in the order in which they   occurred without   any understanding of   the actual time or absolute time during which   any   one   event occurred.      In   other words,   we can discuss that a certain event happened   first, or   previous   to   the   next   event,   or   another   eventcouldn,t have occurred until other events had. A set of   very   simple principles in   conjunction   with   careful   observation allows the determination of   the relative order of   geologic events represented by   the rocks   in         an exposed stratigraphic   section.
Principles of   Geology
An understanding of   stratigraphy begins by recognizing certain principles. Natural processes such as   erosion, deposition, and plate tectonics, and the natural laws of   gravity and   isostasy   that   have produced      the   current   features   of   the   Earth, are   thought   to   have   operated   in   the   same   way   in   the   distant   past   as   they do   now. This   idea   is   known   as   the   PRINCIPLE   OF   UNIFORMITARIANISM   and   was   first   stated   by
James   Hutton   in   the   18th      century. Given   an   understanding   of   uniformitarianism, the   relative   timing   of geologic events can be determined by applying other   simple ideas,   collectively known   as   the PRINCIPLES OF GEOLOGY which include:
1)      THE   PRINCIPLE   OF   ORIGINAL   HORIZONTALITY   —   sediments   that   are   deposited   or precipitated on the Earth,s   surface are done   so   in   mostly   horizontal   layers.      Thus,   if   the rocks   are   noted   to   be   tilted,      folded,      or   metamorphosed,      then      these      events   must   have    followed 代 写GEOSCIENCE 001 SPRING 2022 LAB 5: GEOLOGIC TIME
代做程序编程语言  deposition and lithification;
2)      THE   PRINCIPLE   OF   SUPERPOSITION   — in   a   series   of   layered   rocks   that   have   accumulated on the Earth,S   Surface, the oldeSt rockS are at the bottom   of   the   Sequence   and   the youngeSt   are   at   the   top;
3)      THE   PRINCIPLE   OF   CROSS-CUTTING   RELATIONSHIPS   —   any   geologic   feature   that   is crosscut   or   modified   by   another   feature   must   be   the   older   unit,   i.e.,   the   crosscutting   feature   is the   younger   feature, it   needed   something   to   already   be   there   for   it   to   cut   across.
THINGS   TO   REMEMBER   — each   of   the   rock   types, sedimentary,   igneous,   or   metamorphic,   represent   a unique geologic event, which is referred to using the appropriate terminology   that reflects   the   process(es) that   formed   it,   i.e.;
o   Sedimentary   rocks   are   deposited, so   we   refer   to   the   DEPOSITION   of   a   sedimentary   rock   (e.g.,   deposition of   shale or sandstone)
o   Plutonic   rocks   are   intruded, so   we   refer   to   the   INTRUSION   of   a   plutonic   rock   (e.g.,   intrusion of   granite   or   mafic   dike)
o   Volcanic   rockS   are   erupted   onto   the   Earth,S   Surface,   So   we   refer   to   the   ERUPTION   of   a   volcanic   rock   (e.g., eruption   of   basalt   or   rhyolite)
o   Metamorphic   rocks   form   through   the   METAMORPHISM   of a   protolith.   The   protolith,   not   the metamorphic rock, was deposited, intruded, or extruded. We   report   the   event that   formed   the   protolith, AND   THEN   the   metamorphic   event.       The   metamorphism   itself   is   considered a   separate event. Deformation   and   erosion   of   rocks   are also geologic   events. Some   but not all   of   the rock units may be   folded   or   faulted,   and the   discussion   of   the   relative   ages   of   these   deformation   events   follows   the   same   as   if   talking   about   the   rock   units.    Erosion   events   are   also discussed   as   events   relative   to   other   events.
Unconformities
Unconformities are (usually) irregular contacts between strata in   a   stratigraphic   sequence produced   during   periods   of   erosion   or   non-deposition. These   contacts, thin   boundaries   between   layers   of   rock, represent episodes of   missing information, where there are no recorded rock units.    Unconformities are   labeled   according   to   the   nature   of   the   strata   above   and   below   the   unconformity.      There   are   three   types:
1)      DISCONFORMITY   — a   boundary   between   parallel, undeformed   layers   of   rock, usually   formed   due to   erosion   or   non-deposition;
2)      NONCONFORMITY   —   a   boundary   between    layers   of   sedimentary   rock   overlying   igneous   or metamorphic   rocks.   This   relationship   usually   indicates   that   the   underlying   igneous   or   metamorphic rocks   were   exposed   before   being   buried   and   deposited   upon;
3)      ANGULAR   UNCONFORMITY   — a   boundary   between   layers   of   sedimentary   rock   overlying
tilted   or   folded   beds.    This   relationship   suggests   that   the   older   rocks   were   deformed,   exposed,   and then   deposited   upon.
   

         
加QQ：99515681  WX：codinghelp  Email: 99515681@qq.com
